+++
layout = "post"
title = "Announcing the SH1106 OLED display driver"
date = "2019-02-13 20:47:00"
categories = "electronics rust"
image = "sh1106-header.jpg"
+++

Similar to the [SSD1306](/electronics/rust/2018/04/30/ssd1306-driver.html) covered previously, the
SH1106 OLED display is a small, self contained module perfect for hacking into a project or
prototype. It's available on AliExpress and eBay for peanuts, but is lacking a Rust driver. Until
now with the [`sh1106` crate](https://crates.io/crates/sh1106)!

The SH1106 crate is compatible with the [embedded-hal](https://crates.io/crates/embedded-hal)
traits, so should be usable on anything from an ARM micro to a Raspberry Pi. Please note that it
currently doesn't use the internal memory of the IC as the display buffer, so could be
memory-optimised quite a lot. PRs welcome!

The driver currently only supports I2C as I haven't seen many SPI SH1106 modules in the wild, so
let's take a look at the code to hook up the display over I2C. I'll draw the Rust logo as seen in
the header image in the following example.

I've left some of the boilerplate out of this code, but you can find the
[complete example here](https://github.com/jamwaffles/sh1106/blob/master/examples/image.rs).

```rust
use embedded_graphics::image::Image1BPP;
use embedded_graphics::prelude::*;
use sh1106::prelude::*;
use sh1106::Builder;

let dp = stm32::Peripherals::take().unwrap();
let mut flash = dp.FLASH.constrain();
let mut rcc = dp.RCC.constrain();
let clocks = rcc.cfgr.freeze(&mut flash.acr);
let mut afio = dp.AFIO.constrain(&mut rcc.apb2);
let mut gpiob = dp.GPIOB.split(&mut rcc.apb2);
let scl = gpiob.pb8.into_alternate_open_drain(&mut gpiob.crh);
let sda = gpiob.pb9.into_alternate_open_drain(&mut gpiob.crh);

let i2c = BlockingI2c::i2c1(
    dp.I2C1,
    (scl, sda),
    &mut afio.mapr,
    Mode::Fast {
        frequency: 400_000,
        duty_cycle: DutyCycle::Ratio2to1,
    },
    clocks,
    &mut rcc.apb1,
    1000,
    10,
    1000,
    1000,
);

let mut disp: GraphicsMode<_> = Builder::new().connect_i2c(i2c).into();

disp.init().unwrap();
disp.flush().unwrap();

let im = Image1BPP::new(include_bytes!("./rust.raw"), 64, 64).translate(Coord::new(32, 0));

disp.draw(im.into_iter());

disp.flush().unwrap();
```

[Complete, runnable example](https://github.com/jamwaffles/sh1106/blob/master/examples/image.rs)

Simple as that! The image is included with `include_bytes!()` and is naturally monochrome to suit
the display. It should be compressed to 1 bit per pixel, which can be done with the following
Imagemagick command:

```bash
convert rust.png -depth 1 gray:rust.raw
```

Now let's break down the example above. First, we need a display in `GraphicsMode`, so we can draw
primitives and images.

```rust
let mut disp: GraphicsMode<_> = Builder::new().connect_i2c(i2c).into();
```

This uses the `Builder` pattern to connect to the display over I2C. Take a look at the
[`Builder` docs](https://docs.rs/sh1106/0.1.0/sh1106/builder/struct.Builder.html) for more options
like setting display size and rotation. Lastly, we call `.into()` to convert the display from
`RawMode` into `GraphicsMode`. If you want to just draw individual pixels, skip this step.

Next, we need to initialise the display with `init()` and `flush()` (to clear it).

```rust
disp.init().unwrap();
disp.flush().unwrap();
```

And now, draw the image:

```rust
let im = Image1BPP::new(include_bytes!("./rust.raw"), 64, 64).translate(Coord::new(32, 0));

disp.draw(im.into_iter());

disp.flush().unwrap();
```

The image is drawn to the display buffer by using `im.into_iter()`. `embedded-graphics` tries hard
to use as little memory as possible internally, and iterators really help with that! Currently, the
SH1106 crate uses a framebuffer, but the IC contains its own memory that can be read and written.
This means that, in the future, a microcontroller could consume almost no memory when driving this
display. Awesome. Once the image is in the buffer, a call to `disp.flush()` sends the buffer to the
screen.

Please help test this crate out! There are
[a few examples](https://github.com/jamwaffles/sh1106/tree/master/examples) that should Just Work on
an STM32 Blue Pill, but it would be great to test this crate on other devices as well. The SH1106
contains a readable framebuffer which the crate currently doesn't use. This wastes a lot of memory
on the microcontroller, so using the builtin framebuffer is a priority for future work.
